doc: changes to merge criteria (4 eyes principle) (#62122)
zephyrproject-rtos/zephyr: doc/project/project_roles.rst

Merge Criteria
++++++++++++++

* Minimal of 2 approvals:

>   * A collaborator from the same subsystem.

Reviewer: In fact this is "from one of the the impacted subsystems".

Author: yes, I will change the language

  * Alternately another maintainer of another subsystem

>   * Approval by the assignee

Reviewer: This is a bit unclear, should it be at least two approvals out of these three categories, or two approvals coming from one category is ok ?

Author: at least two approvals from all categories, I can make this clearer

> * Four eye principle on the organisation level.

Reviewer 2: What does "on the organisation level" mean? 
That the code is considered common?
That the eyes need to be from "the organization"?

>   * Changes or additions to common and shared code shall have reviews from

Reviewer: I think it wouldn't hurt defining "common and shared code". Is that strictly equivalent to non vendor specific code ?

Author: sure

    different organisations (at least one review and approval from a different
    submitters' organisation).

>   * Changes or additions to hardware support (driver, SoC, boards) shall at

Reviewer 2: Does this refer to common driver APIs? or to any driver, soc, or board related code?
(because if the 2nd, I do not expect people from other organizations to prioritize the time to review and understand code that is specific to somebody else's boards or drivers)

Author: no, driver, soc and board implementations, not APIs. addressed.

>   * Changes or additions to hardware support (driver, SoC, boards) shall at

Reviewer: Agreed

    least have the merger be from a different organisation.

>   * Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating from the same

Reviewer 2: > " Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating from the same"

Does this mean a) "Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating from *their* same organization"? or b) if both submitter and reviewer are from the same organization?

(in case of b) this would be a severe problem for quite a few areas where there just isn't so many involved developers. In some areas even getting two actual reviews is just plain difficult )

Author: it means that we shall not have submitter, approvers and mergers from the same organisation. It is recognised that we have some areas (beside hardware support and drivers, etc.) where this might be a problem with reviews, but in this case the only change introduced is that the merger is from a different org.

>     organisation if all other reviewers are also from the same organisation.

Reviewer: Is that:
-If all approvals of a change come from the same organisation, it can only be merged by a release engineer coming from another organisation.
-A change coming from one organisation needs at least an approval from another organisation to be merged

?

    To be able to merge such changes, at least one review shall be from a

>     different organisation.

Reviewer: What about ?
A change coming from one organisation needs at least an approval from another organisation to be merged

>   * Exceptions can be made for areas with contributions largly coming from one

Reviewer 2: Are this exceptions to be done by the release managers as they go?
or can release managers get into trouble if they merge something on good faith/under the understanding there is appropriate reviews?

Reviewer 2: I meant to imply that we should be clear about who makes the exception, i.e.
"Release engineers may make exceptions for areas with contributions largely coming from one"..

By the way, largly => largely

Sidecomment:

> When in doubt, just ask someone else to merge something you are not sure about.

When in doubt typically the merger moves to the next PR ;)

Merge Criteria
++++++++++++++

* Minimal of 2 approvals from the list below, including an approval by the
  designated assignee:

  * Collaborators from the same subsystem.

>   * Maintainers and collaborators of other areas.

Reviewer 2: > Maintainers and collaborators of other areas.

Is this meant to say "Maintainers or collaborators of other areas affected by the PR" ?

I'm wondering if these 3 sentences would not be better rephrased overall to something like:

```
* Minimal of 2 approvals.
* PRs should be reviewed by at least a maintainer or collaborator of each affected area; 
  Unless the changes to a given area are considered trivial enough, in which case
  approvals by other affected subsystems maintainers/collaborators would suffice.
```

* Four eye principle on the organisation level. We already require at least 2
  approvals (basic four eye principle), however, such reviews and approvals
  might be unintentionally biased in the case where the submitter is from the
  same organisation as the approvers. To allow for project wide review and
  approvals, the merge criteria is extended with the guidelines below:

  * Changes or additions to common and shared code shall have reviews from
    different organisations (at least one review and approval from an
    organisation different than the submitters').
    Common and shared code is defined as anything that does not fall under
    :file:`soc`, :file:`boards` and :file:`drivers/*/*`.
  * Changes or additions to hardware support (driver, SoC, boards) shall at
    least have the merger be from a different organisation. This applies only
    to implementation of an API supporting vendor specific hardware and not the
    APIs.
  * Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating and reviewed

>     only by their own organisation. To be able to merge such changes, at least

Reviewer 2: Isn't "To be able to merge such changes, at least one review shall be from a different organisation."
fully redundant with the previous sentence?

Author: it is saying it in a different way.

    one review shall be from a different organisation.
  * Exceptions can be made for areas with contributions largly coming from one
    organisation and where reviewes from other organisations are not possible,
    however, merges shall be completed by a person from a different
    organisation.

* A minimum review period of 2 days, 4 hours for trivial changes (see

>   :ref:`review_time`). Hotfixes can be merged at any time after CI has passed.

Reviewer 2: Should we say "Hotfixes can be merged at any time after CI has passed, and are excluded from most of the conditions listed above"?

Author: yep

  approvals (basic four eye principle), however, such reviews and approvals
  might be unintentionally biased in the case where the submitter is from the
  same organisation as the approvers. To allow for project wide review and
  approvals, the merge criteria is extended with the guidelines below:

  * Changes or additions to common and shared code shall have reviews from
    different organisations (at least one review and approval from an
    organisation different than the submitters').
    Common and shared code is defined as anything that does not fall under
    :file:`soc`, :file:`boards` and :file:`drivers/*/*`.
  * Changes or additions to hardware support (driver, SoC, boards) shall at
    least have the merger be from a different organisation. This applies only
    to implementation of an API supporting vendor specific hardware and not the
    APIs.
  * Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating and reviewed
    only by their own organisation. To be able to merge such changes, at least
    one review shall be from a different organisation.
  * Release engineers may make exceptions for areas with contributions primarily

>     coming from one organisation and where reviewes from other organisations are

Reviewer: s/reviewes/reviews

    not possible, however, merges shall be completed by a person from a different
    organisation.

* A minimum review period of 2 days, 4 hours for trivial changes (see
  :ref:`review_time`).
* Hotfixes can be merged at any time after CI has passed and are excluded from
  most of the conditions listed above.
* All required checks are passing:

  * Codeowners
  * Device Tree
  * Documentation
  * Gitlint
  * Identity/Emails
  * Kconfig

>   * License checks

Reviewer 3: I would not even bother listing the individual tests. It's a required check anyway, this list changes over time, it's probably out of date anyway. Would not miss it if you were to drop it, even just "All required checks are passing" should be more than enough, sounds like saying "required check are required" :-)

Author: sure, not much related to this PR though, we can clean this up in a followup.

Merge Criteria
++++++++++++++

> * Minimal of 2 approvals from the list below, including an approval by the

Reviewer 2: This sentence now sounds a bit funny. Maybe just:
"Minimal of 2 approvals, including an approval by the designated assignee." (?)

* Pull requests should be reviewed by at least a maintainer or collaborator of
  each affected area; Unless the changes to a given area are considered trivial
  enough, in which case approvals by other affected subsystems
  maintainers/collaborators would suffice.

> * Four eye principle on the organisation level. We already require at least 2

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
* Four eyes principle on the organisation level. We already require at least 2
  approvals (basic four eyeS principle), however, such reviews and approvals
```

* Four eye principle on the organisation level. We already require at least 2
  approvals (basic four eye principle), however, such reviews and approvals
  might be unintentionally biased in the case where the submitter is from the
  same organisation as the approvers. To allow for project wide review and
  approvals, the merge criteria is extended with the guidelines below:

  * Changes or additions to common and shared code shall have reviews from
    different organisations (at least one review and approval from an
    organisation different than the submitters').
    Common and shared code is defined as anything that does not fall under
    :file:`soc`, :file:`boards` and :file:`drivers/*/*`.
  * Changes or additions to hardware support (driver, SoC, boards) shall at
    least have the merger be from a different organisation. This applies only
    to implementation of an API supporting vendor specific hardware and not the
    APIs.
  * Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating and reviewed
    only by their own organisation. To be able to merge such changes, at least
    one review shall be from a different organisation.

>   * Release engineers may make exceptions for areas with contributions largly

Reviewer 2: largly => largely

  * Release engineers shall not merge code changes originating and reviewed
    only by their own organisation. To be able to merge such changes, at least
    one review shall be from a different organisation.

> * A minimum review period of 2 days, 4 hours for trivial changes (see

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* A minimum review period of 2 business days, 4 hours for trivial changes (see
```

>   :ref:`review_time`).

Reviewer 4: I find these very short but off-topic...
